Rework JS manual instrumentation docs (#2965)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/js/manual.md

  - /docs/instrumentation/js/api/tracing
  - /docs/instrumentation/js/instrumentation
weight: 30
spelling: cSpell:ignore Millis rolldice dicelib
description: Manual instrumentation for OpenTelemetry JavaScript
---

{{% docs/instrumentation/manual-intro %}}

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}

> On this page you will learn, how you can add traces, metrics and logs to your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On this page you will learn how you can add traces, metrics and logs to your
```

_natively_ or you can make use of
[instrumentation libraries](/docs/instrumentation/js/libraries/).

{{% /alert %}}

## Example app preparation {#example-app}

This page uses a modified version of the example app from
[Getting Started](/docs/instrumentation/js/getting-started/nodejs/) to help you
learn about manual instrumentation.

You don't have to use the example app: if you want to instrument your own app or
library, follow the instructions here to adapt the process to your own code.

### Dependencies

Create an empty NPM `package.json` file in a new directory:

```shell
npm init -y
```

Next, install Express dependencies.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=shell >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
npm install typescript \
  ts-node \
  @types/node \
  express \
  @types/express
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
npm install express
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### Create and launch an HTTP Server

To highlight the difference between instrumenting a _library_ and a standalone
_app_, split out the dice rolling into a _library file_, which then will be
imported as a dependency by the _app file_.

> Create the _library file_ named `dice.ts` (or `dice.js`) if you are not using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the _library file_ named `dice.ts` (or `dice.js` if you are not using
```

> typescript) and add the following code to it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypeScript) and add the following code to it:
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*dice.ts*/
function rollOnce(min: number, max: number) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

export function rollTheDice(rolls: number, min: number, max: number) {
  const result: number[] = []
  for(let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
    result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
  }
  return result
}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*dice.js*/
function rollOnce(min, max) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

function rollTheDice(rolls, min, max) {
  const result = []
  for (let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
    result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
  }
  return result
}

module.exports = { rollTheDice }
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> Create the _app file_ named `app.ts` (or `app.js`) if not using typescript) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the _app file_ named `app.ts` (or `app.js` if not using TypeScript) and
```

app.get("/rolldice", (req, res) => {
  const rolls = req.query.rolls ? parseInt(req.query.rolls.toString()) : NaN
  if(isNaN(rolls)) {
    res.status(400).send("Request parameter 'rolls' is missing or not a number.")
    return
  }
  res.send(JSON.stringify(rollTheDice(rolls, 1, 6)));
});

app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Listening for requests on http://localhost:${PORT}`);
});

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*app.js*/
const express = require("express");
const { rollTheDice } = require("./dice.js");

const PORT = parseInt(process.env.PORT || "8080");
const app = express();

app.get("/rolldice", (req, res) => {
  const rolls = req.query.rolls ? parseInt(req.query.rolls.toString()) : NaN
  if(isNaN(rolls)) {
    res.status(400).send("Request parameter 'rolls' is missing or not a number.")
    return
  }
  res.send(JSON.stringify(rollTheDice(rolls, 1, 6)));
});

app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Listening for requests on http://localhost:${PORT}`);
});

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

To ensure that it is working, run the application with the following command and
open <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> in your web browser.

> <!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```

{{< tabpane lang=console >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
$ npx ts-node app.ts
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
$ node app.js
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}

> <!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
```

## Manual instrumentation setup

### Dependencies

Install OpenTelemetry API packages:

```shell
npm install @opentelemetry/api @opentelemetry/resources @opentelemetry/semantic-conventions
```

### Initialize the SDK

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library,
**skip this step**. {{% /alert %}}

If you instrument a Node.js application install the
[OpenTelemetry SDK for Node.js](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/sdk-node):

```shell
npm install @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

Before any other module in your application is loaded, you must initialize the
SDK. If you fail to initialize the SDK or initialize it too late, no-op

> implementations will be provided to any library which acquires a tracer or meter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementations will be provided to any library that acquires a tracer or meter
```

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  resource: new Resource({
    [ SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME ]: "yourServiceName",
    [ SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_VERSION ]: "1.0",
  }),
  traceExporter: new ConsoleSpanExporter(),
  metricReader: new PeriodicExportingMetricReader({
    exporter: new ConsoleMetricExporter()
  })
});

sdk
  .start()
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*instrumentation.ts*/
import { NodeSDK } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-node';
import { ConsoleSpanExporter } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node';
import { PeriodicExportingMetricReader, ConsoleMetricExporter } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-metrics';
const { Resource } = require('@opentelemetry/resources');
const { SemanticResourceAttributes } = require('@opentelemetry/semantic-conventions');

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  resource: new Resource({
    [ SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME ]: "dice-server",
    [ SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_VERSION ]: "0.1.0",
  }),
  traceExporter: new ConsoleSpanExporter(),
  metricReader: new PeriodicExportingMetricReader({
    exporter: new ConsoleMetricExporter()
  })
});

sdk
  .start()
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> For debugging and local development purpose, the following example exports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For debugging and local development purposes, the following example exports
```

telemetry to the console. After you have finished setting up manual
instrumentation, you need to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export the app's telemetry data](/docs/instrumentation/js/exporters/) to one or
more telemetry backends.

> The example also sets up SDK default attributes, which are necessary, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example also sets up SDK default attributes, which are 
```

Author: Since service.name is required and service.version is optional but recommended saying that they are "beneficial" alone is not strong enough.

> The example also sets up SDK default attributes:

maybe we can live without both?

Reviewer: Yeah hm... maybe "The example also sets up SDK default attributes, including the required service name" ?

Author: tried a different wording, please take another look and what you think.

});

app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Listening for requests on http://localhost:${PORT}`);
});
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

To ensure that it is working, run the application with the following command and
open <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> in your web browser.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=console persistLang=false >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
$ npx ts-node app.ts
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
$ node app.js
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

## Setup

### Dependencies

To get started with instrumenting your code, install the OpenTelemetry API
packages via `npm`:

```shell
npm install \
  @opentelemetry/api \
  @opentelemetry/resources \
  @opentelemetry/semantic-conventions
```

### SDK default attributes

{{% alert color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, skip this step.

There are also alternative ways to setup resource attributes, learn about them
in the guide about [Resources](/docs/instrumentation/js/resources/).
{{% /alert %}}

> There are some [resource attributes](/docs/instrumentation/js/resources/), that
> you must (and want) to provide, when using the OpenTelemetry SDK:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using the OpenTelemetry SDK, certain [resource attributes](/docs/instrumentation/js/resources/) are necessary, and beneficial, to provide:
```

- `service.name` (required): logical name of the service

> - `service.version` (optional): The version string of the service API or
>   implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `service.version` (optional): version of the service API or implementation.
```

> You want to set the `service.name` to an appropriate value for your application.
> If you use the [example application](#example-application), you can set it to
> `dice-server`. To do so, create a file named `instrumentation.ts` (or
> `instrumentation.js` if not using typescript) and add the following code to it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set these attributes for the example app, create a file named `instrumentation.ts` (or
`instrumentation.js` if not using typescript) and add the following code to it:
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*instrumentation.ts*/
import { Resource } from "@opentelemetry/resources";
import { SemanticResourceAttributes } from "@opentelemetry/semantic-conventions";

const resource =
  Resource.default().merge(
    new Resource({
      [SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME]: "dice-server",
      [SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_VERSION]: "0.1.0",
    })
  );
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*instrumentation.js*/
const { Resource } = require("@opentelemetry/resources");
const { SemanticResourceAttributes } = require("@opentelemetry/semantic-conventions");

const resource =
  Resource.default().merge(
    new Resource({
      [SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME]: "dice-server",
      [SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_VERSION]: "0.1.0",
    })
  );
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> Next, ensure that `instrumentation.ts` (or `instrumentation.js`) is required in
> your node invocation, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now run the app by requiring the library:
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=shell persistLang=false >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
ts-node --require ./instrumentation.ts app.ts
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
node --require ./instrumentation.js app.js
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> This basic setup has no effect on your application yet, you can now continue
> with adding code for [traces](#traces), [metrics](#metrics) and [logs](#logs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This basic setup has no effect on your app yet. You need to 
add code for [traces](#traces), [metrics](#metrics), and/or [logs](#logs).
```

## Traces

### Initialize Tracing

> {{% alert color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, skip this step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, **skip this step**.
```

{{% /alert %}}

> To start [tracing](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/) your application, you'll need

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable [tracing](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/) in your app, you'll need
```

to have an initialized
[`TracerProvider`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer-provider) that will let
you create a [`Tracer`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer).

If a `TracerProvider` is not created, the OpenTelemetry APIs for tracing will
use a no-op implementation and fail to generate data.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Next, update `instrumentation.ts` (or `instrumentation.js`) to contain all the
> SDK initialization code in it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As explained next, modify the `instrumentation.*` file to include all the SDK initialization code in Node and the browser.
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> This will have no effect on your application yet: you need to
> [create spans](#create-spans) to have telemetry emitted by your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will have no effect on your app yet: you need to
[create spans](#create-spans) to have telemetry emitted by your app.
```

You'll need to bundle this file with your web application to be able to use
tracing throughout the rest of your web application.

> This will have no effect on your application yet: you need to
> [create spans](#create-spans) to have telemetry emitted by your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will have no effect on your app yet: you need to
[create spans](#create-spans) to have telemetry emitted by your app.
```

In most cases, stick with `BatchSpanProcessor` over `SimpleSpanProcessor`.

> #### Configure exporter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Configure an exporter
```

> The `ConsoleSpanExporter` will write spans to the console. After you have
> finished setting up your manual instrumentation, you want to want to configure
> an appropriate exporter to
> [export your telemetry data](http://localhost:1313/docs/instrumentation/js/exporters)
> to one or more telemetry backends.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ConsoleSpanExporter` will write spans to the console. After you have
finished setting up manual instrumentation, you need to configure
an appropriate exporter to
[export the app's telemetry data](/docs/instrumentation/js/exporters/)
to one or more telemetry backends.
```

In most cases, stick with `BatchSpanProcessor` over `SimpleSpanProcessor`.

> #### Configure an exporter

Reviewer 3: Reading this page, I think we could do well to have a code sample.

First, elaborate that the default exporter is `localhost:4317`, which means that if they also configure a collector (link to this...somehow), then it will send to that collector by default.

Then, explicitly say that you're wiring up the console exporter for the purposes of local development/seeing the instrumentation easily. And also include a comment in the source code that says it's for local development and debugging only.

Author: > First, elaborate that the default exporter is localhost:4317, which means that if they also configure a collector (link to this...somehow), then it will send to that collector by default.

I tried to verify this, but it's actually not the case, here's my instrumentation.ts:

```js
/*instrumentation.ts*/
import { BatchSpanProcessor, ConsoleSpanExporter } from "@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-base";
import { Resource } from "@opentelemetry/resources";
import { SemanticResourceAttributes } from "@opentelemetry/semantic-conventions";
import { NodeTracerProvider } from "@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node";

const resource =
  Resource.default().merge(
    new Resource({
      [SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME]: "dice-server",
      [SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_VERSION]: "0.1.0",
    })
  );

const provider = new NodeTracerProvider({
    resource: resource,
});
// const exporter = new ConsoleSpanExporter();
// const processor = new BatchSpanProcessor(exporter);
// provider.addSpanProcessor(processor);

provider.register();
```

I also ran it with debugging on, but I don't see any traces being exported. I know that this is true if you use the NodeSDK setup steps (`const sdk = new NodeSDK({ ... }); sdk.start()`).

Author: Wondering if the setup section should work with NodeSDK and only comment on the capability to do low-level wiring yourself 🤔 

cc @open-telemetry/javascript-approvers

Reviewer 3: Hrm, I guess I was thinking in terms of the NodeSDK. I think we should finally switch to the Node SDK for this page as well. It was less stable when I initially did this section, but it's been out long enough that we should just do the switch.

Reviewer 4: Sorry for the late response: As much as it pains me to say, I'm always hesitant to recommend the `NodeSDK` as it has grown over the years and was never fully thought through. It needs a refactor/rewrite, is missing many features one would expect, and should not be considered stable (as indicated by the `0.x` version). It also pulls in a lot of dependencies that cause trouble in certain enviornments (such as the jaeger exporter). 

Therefore, until we address those issues, I think making people depend on its behavior may be doing more harm than good in the long term.

Author: thanks @pichlermarc. I was not aware of this status of `NodeSDK`. We also use it through out the getting started docs for JavaScript and a few other places (can collect them as needed). So this sounds we should keep things as they are with the non-NodeSDK-approach?

Reviewer 3: How likely are proposed changes to be a big deal? In practice the NodeSDK has been pretty stable, so much so that we (hoenycomb) have been able to rely on it for almost a year in our own distribution. There was a breaking change at one point but it was really simple to update.

Reviewer 3: I guess this might be worth a SIG convo, but I personally think that's fine enough to document. I would wager the large majority of usage is just in passing in config options and running `start`/`shutdown`.

Reviewer 4: I'll bring it up at this week's JS SIG 🙂 - I think as long as only constructor/start and shutdown are used in the docs this should be fine. 

If the others in the JS SIG meeting on Wednesday agree, I'll set steps to mark these methods as deprecated, then remove them in a later release.

Reviewer 3: Sounds good! I would also say that if there's some known "this will break people" work that you're planning on, if that work being done helps get us documenting the NodeSDK, then I'd support frontloading it.

Reviewer 4: We discussed it in the SIG. There were no objections to removing the said methods, so I opened a PR to deprecate them. If it goes through we will remove them in later releases. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/pull/3996

The config options of NodeSDK will remain as-is (some logs support will be added in the upcoming release).

Long story short: It's safe to move on with using `@opentelemetry/sdk-node` in the docs :slightly_smiling_face:

Reviewer 3: That's superb, thanks @pichlermarc!

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*dice.ts*/
import { trace } from "@opentelemetry/api";

const tracer = trace.getTracer(
  'dice-lib',
);

function rollOnce(min: number, max: number) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

export function rollTheDice(rolls: number, min: number, max: number) {
  const result: number[] = []
  for(let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
    result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
  }
  return result
}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*dice.js*/
const { trace } = require("@opentelemetry/api");

const tracer = trace.getTracer(
  'dice-lib',
);

function rollOnce(min, max) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

function rollTheDice(rolls, min, max) {
  const result = []
  for (let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
    result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
  }
  return result
}

module.exports = { rollTheDice }
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### Create spans

Now that you have [tracers](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer) initialized,
you can create [spans](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans).

> The API of OpenTelemetry JavaScript exposes two methods, that allow you to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API of OpenTelemetry JavaScript exposes two methods that allow you to
```

create spans:

- [`tracer.startSpan`](https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-js/interfaces/_opentelemetry_api.Tracer.html#startSpan):
  Starts a new span without setting it on context.
- [`tracer.startActiveSpan`](https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-js/interfaces/_opentelemetry_api.Tracer.html#startActiveSpan):
  Starts a new span and calls the given callback function passing it the created
  span as first argument. The new span gets set in context and this context is
  activated for the duration of the function call.

In most cases you want to use the latter (`tracer.startActiveSpan`), as it takes

> care of setting the span and it's context active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
care of setting the span and its context active.
```

The code below illustrates how to create an active span.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
import { trace, Span } from "@opentelemetry/api";

/* ... */

export function rollTheDice(rolls: number, min: number, max: number) {
  // Create a span. A span must be closed.
  return tracer.startActiveSpan('rollTheDice', (span: Span) => {
    const result: number[] = []
    for(let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
      result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
    }
    // Be sure to end the span!
    span.end();
    return result
  })
}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
function rollTheDice(rolls, min, max) {
  // Create a span. A span must be closed.
  return tracer.startActiveSpan('rollTheDice', (span) => {
    const result = []
    for (let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
      result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
    }
    // Be sure to end the span!
    span.end();
    return result
  })
}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}

> <!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
```

//...

const tracer = opentelemetry.trace.getTracer(
  'instrumentation-scope-name',
  'instrumentation-scope-version
);

// You can now use a 'tracer' to do tracing!
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabpane>}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> The values of `instrumentation-scope-name` and `instrumentation-scope-version`
> should be set to values that uniquely identify the
> [instrumentation scope](/docs/specs/otel/glossary/#instrumentation-scope), such
> as the package, module or class name. While the name is required, the version is
> optional and may be set if appropriate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The values of `instrumentation-scope-name` and `instrumentation-scope-version`
should uniquely identify the
[instrumentation scope](/docs/specs/otel/glossary/#instrumentation-scope), such
as the package, module or class name. While the name is required, the version is
optional.
```

It's generally recommended to call `getTracer` in your app when you need it
rather than exporting the `tracer` instance to the rest of your app. This helps
avoid trickier application load issues when other required dependencies are
involved.

> In the case of the [example application](#example-application), there are two

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of the [example app](#example-app), there are two
```

});

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

And second, in the _library file_ `dice.ts` (or `dice.js`):

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*dice.ts*/
import { trace } from "@opentelemetry/api";

const tracer = trace.getTracer(
  'dice-lib',
);

function rollOnce(min: number, max: number) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

export function rollTheDice(rolls: number, min: number, max: number) {
  const result: number[] = []
  for(let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
    result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
  }
  return result
}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*dice.js*/
const { trace } = require("@opentelemetry/api");

const tracer = trace.getTracer(
  'dice-lib',
);

function rollOnce(min, max) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

function rollTheDice(rolls, min, max) {
  const result = []
  for (let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
    result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
  }
  return result
}

module.exports = { rollTheDice }
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### Create spans

> Now that you have [`Tracer`s](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer)
> initialized, you can create [`Span`s](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans).

Reviewer 2: This doesn't look good:

> <img width="475" alt="image" src="https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/assets/4140793/887e77af-ac00-41a9-ae19-9d580fd0a447">

How about:

```suggestion
Now that you have [tracers](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer)
initialized, you can create [spans](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans).
```

> The below code sample shows how to create an active span, which is the most
> common kind of span to create.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The code below illustrates how to create an active span, which is the most
common kind of span.
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
import { trace, Span } from "@opentelemetry/api";

/* ... */

export function rollTheDice(rolls: number, min: number, max: number) {
  // Create a span. A span must be closed.
  return tracer.startActiveSpan('rollTheDice', (span: Span) => {
    const result: number[] = []
    for(let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
      result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
    }
    // Be sure to end the span!
    span.end();
    return result
  })
}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
function rollTheDice(rolls, min, max) {
  // Create a span. A span must be closed.
  return tracer.startActiveSpan('rollTheDice', (span) => {
    const result = []
    for (let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
      result.push(rollOnce(min, max));
    }
    // Be sure to end the span!
    span.end();
    return result
  })
}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> If you followed the instructions using the
> [example application](#example-application) up to this point, you can copy the
> code above in your _library file_ `dice.ts` (or `dice.js`). You should now be
> able to see spans being emitted by your application:

Reviewer 2: Is there any reason for readers to not have "followed the instructions ... up to this point"? Isn't that the basic assumption in the page, that by defaul the reader will be using he example app?

```suggestion
If you followed the instructions using the
[example app](#example-app) up to this point, you can copy the
code above in your library file `dice.ts` (or `dice.js`). You should now be
able to see spans emitted from your app.
```

> Start your application as follows and then send requests to your application by
> hitting <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> with your browser or `curl`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start your app as follows, and then send it requests by
visiting <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> with your browser or `curl`.
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=shell persistLang=false >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
ts-node --require ./instrumentation.ts app.ts
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
node --require ./instrumentation.js app.js
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> After a while you should see the spans printed in the console by the
> `ConsoleSpanExporter`, e.g.:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a while, you should see the spans printed in the console by the
`ConsoleSpanExporter`, something like this:
```

```json
{
  "traceId": "6cc927a05e7f573e63f806a2e9bb7da8",
  "parentId": undefined,
  "name": "rollTheDice",
  "id": "117d98e8add5dc80",
  "kind": 0,
  "timestamp": 1688386291908349,
  "duration": 501,
  "attributes": {},
  "status": { "code": 0 },
  "events": [],
  "links": []
}
```

### Create nested spans

Nested [spans](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans) let you track work that's

> nested in nature. For example, the `rollOnce` function below represents a nested
> operation. The following sample creates a nested span that tracks the `rollOnce`
> function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nested in nature. For example, the `rollOnce()` function below represents a nested
operation. The following sample creates a nested span that tracks `rollOnce()`:
```

  return tracer.startActiveSpan(`rollOnce:${i}`, (span: Span) => {
    const result = Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
    span.end()
    return result
  })
}

export function rollTheDice(rolls: number, min: number, max: number) {
  // Create a span. A span must be closed.
  return tracer.startActiveSpan('rollTheDice', (parentSpan: Span) => {
    const result: number[] = []
    for(let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
      result.push(rollOnce(i, min, max));
    }
    // Be sure to end the span!
    parentSpan.end();
    return result
  })
}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
function rollOnce(i, min, max) {
  return tracer.startActiveSpan(`rollOnce:${i}`, (span) => {
    const result = Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
    span.end()
    return result
  })
}

function rollTheDice(rolls, min, max) {
  // Create a span. A span must be closed.
  return tracer.startActiveSpan('rollTheDice', (parentSpan) => {
    const result = []
    for(let i = 0; i < rolls; i++) {
      result.push(rollOnce(i, min, max));
    }
    // Be sure to end the span!
    parentSpan.end();
    return result
  })
}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> This code will create a child span for each _roll_ that has `parentSpan`'s span
> ID as their parent ID, e.g.:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This code creates a child span for each _roll_ that has `parentSpan`'s
ID as their parent ID:
```

//...

const tracer = opentelemetry.trace.getTracer(
  'instrumentation-scope-name',
  'instrumentation-scope-version
);

// You can now use a 'tracer' to do tracing!
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabpane>}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

The values of `instrumentation-scope-name` and `instrumentation-scope-version`
should uniquely identify the
[instrumentation scope](/docs/specs/otel/glossary/#instrumentation-scope), such

> as the package, module or class name. While the name is required, the version is
> optional.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as the package, module or class name. While the name is required, the version is
still recommended despite being optional.
```

`dice.js`). You should now be able to see spans emitted from your app.

Start your app as follows, and then send it requests by visiting
<http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> with your browser or `curl`.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=shell persistLang=false >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
ts-node --require ./instrumentation.ts app.ts
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
node --require ./instrumentation.js app.js
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

After a while, you should see the spans printed in the console by the
`ConsoleSpanExporter`, something like this:

```json
{
  "traceId": "6cc927a05e7f573e63f806a2e9bb7da8",
  "parentId": undefined,
  "name": "rollTheDice",
  "id": "117d98e8add5dc80",
  "kind": 0,
  "timestamp": 1688386291908349,
  "duration": 501,
  "attributes": {},
  "status": { "code": 0 },
  "events": [],
  "links": []
}
```

### Create nested spans

Nested [spans](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans) let you track work that's
nested in nature. For example, the `rollOnce()` function below represents a
nested operation. The following sample creates a nested span that tracks

> `rollOnce()`:

Reviewer 3: Recommend quickly elaborating that in JS/TS, you need to use `startActiveSpan` here, otherwise you'll have to use the context API to explicitly set spans as active in the current context.

...which is a pain, hence the API! ...but that can be left out :)

Author: I added a comment about that a little bit up in the "Create Spans" section:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/2965/files#diff-d5f10bf675fa9b56597823729a28aef6cddf15319e74e6518a546c09297d9021R635

pairs to a [`Span`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans) so it carries more
information about the current operation that it's tracking.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
function rollOnce(i: number, min: number, max: number) {
  return tracer.startActiveSpan(`rollOnce:${i}`, (span: Span) => {
    const result = Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);

    // Add an attribute to the span
    span.setAttribute('dicelib.rolled', result.toString());

    span.end()
    return result
  })
}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
function rollOnce(i, min, max) {
  return tracer.startActiveSpan(`rollOnce:${i}`, (span) => {
    const result = Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);

    // Add an attribute to the span
    span.setAttribute('dicelib.rolled', result.toString());

    span.end()
    return result
  })
}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}

> <!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
```

pairs to a [`Span`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans) so it carries more
information about the current operation that it's tracking.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
function rollOnce(i: number, min: number, max: number) {
  return tracer.startActiveSpan(`rollOnce:${i}`, (span: Span) => {
    const result = Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);

    // Add an attribute to the span
    span.setAttribute('dicelib.rolled', result.toString());

    span.end()
    return result
  })
}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
function rollOnce(i, min, max) {
  return tracer.startActiveSpan(`rollOnce:${i}`, (span) => {
    const result = Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);

    // Add an attribute to the span
    span.setAttribute('dicelib.rolled', result.toString());

    span.end()
    return result
  })
}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}

> <!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Reviewer 3: Recommend adding a short paragraph at the end stating that the key difference here is `startSpan`, which by default creates an independent span rather than a nested/child span.

Author: not sure what your comment is referring to? In the lines above no `startSpan` is used

### Initialize Metrics

{{% alert color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, skip this step.
{{% /alert %}}

To enable [metrics](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/) in your app, you'll need to
have an initialized
[`MeterProvider`](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/#meter-provider) that will let
you create a [`Meter`](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/#meter).

If a `MeterProvider` is not created, the OpenTelemetry APIs for metrics will use
a no-op implementation and fail to generate data. As explained next, modify the
`instrumentation.ts` (or `instrumentation.js`) file to include all the SDK
initialization code in Node and the browser.

#### Node.js

If you followed the instructions to [initialize the SDK](#initialize-the-sdk)
above, you have a `MeterProvider` setup for you already. You can continue with
[acquiring a meter](#acquiring-a-meter).

> ##### Initializing tracing with `sdk-metrics`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Initializing metrics with `sdk-metrics`
```
